So welcome back! In this video we're going to use a UI
slider, to visually show our progress in the
level. We're going to make the slider countdown,
towards the end of the level. And when time
runs out, we're going to show a "You Survived" text on the screen
and play a cheerful sound, before then
autoloading the next level.
So, first thing I need to do is get myself a
slider on the screen. So, if you go to your
Level 1 or Level 2, I think we're calling it. What's it called?
Scene Level 01. Yeah!
Go to your Level 01, the one we've been working on, and
go to your Level Canvas and create yourself
a Game Object UI Slider.
Game Object, UI, Slider. It's in
New Item, so click that,
and then, against that Slider
we're going to need to make ourselves a script, but first,
let's just introduce you to the Slider and all the things that have come along
with it. So, if you zoom
in, you'll see that you've actually got a Slider. If you can't find it, double click
on the word Slider. You'll find it in your game space.
You can swtich to the UI Edit Mode, with the T key
or up to the top left of your Editor, and move this
guy up towards the top of the screen.
I'm going to
put mine just next to the
Star Display, and then, make it big enough to pretty much fill that
space and look half sensible. Something
like that! I'm not trying to be a super
artist here. OK, let's look at the Slider. At the top level,
what does it have? It has a Rect Transform. That indicates it's
a UI Element, rather than a World Space Element, which is
fine for this. And then, it has this Slider Script
thing here, which controls everything. One thing we
can control is the current value, and you see as I change it in the Inspector,
the actual Slider moves. So, I'm going to set it
to 0 and then as the level progresses, the slider is going to move across to
the right, evenly like this. And when we get to the end, that's going to be
the end of the level. We will have survived, which is great!
Now, there's other parts of the Slider you can dig around in and
play with. If you want to customize the background color, you can do that
under Slider, Background, Color. You can even
put materials and tiled materials, all sorts
in there. You've got the Fill Area and the Fill itself,
and then the Handle and the Handle Slide Area.
So, lots of elements you can change. We're just going to keep it simple for now and
just have a simple Slider. If you want to customize this and make
it look prettier, please please please do! So now,
we need something to actually control the Slider, so I'm going to attach
the script directly to the Slider. What are we going to
call it? I'm going to call it GameTimer.
OK, a GameTimer Script tidied up into the GameTimer
Folder. And guess what?
I'm going to be a Git and I'm going to ask you to do all the rest of it.
[Laughs] OK, you're going to need the UnityEngine UI namespace,
at the top here. So, I'll give you that hint
because it is a UI Element.
The type is just Slider. Slider will just work.
And what I want you to do, as a challenge, is the following.
Write the whole GameTimer.cs class and make it
work. Go and find yourself the
Slider component, which is just
of type Slider. Manage the level
time, start and remaining. You're going to want to expose
at least one of those as a public
int, I suggest a seconds, and make
that changeable in the Inspector, it's
the amount of time you have at the start. Move the
Slider backwards or to the right, every frame,
and then, on completion play some
music and display a message and load level.
now, when it comes to music, I'm going to be using the
glitch game Quest Complete sound. On glitch
thegame.com/downloads, we have this Quest Complete,
which you're hearing [Music Plays in Background]
in the background there. That's the sound I'm going to use on mine. See if you can do
the whole lot. See if you can just get the win condition
programmed. Go ahead, pause the video, and give it a go!
Cool! Welcome back!
So, let's take a look at how we make this work!
So, here's our GameTime.cs Script, attached to
this UI component here,
which also has
the Slider component next to it. So, we have a Slider GameObject,
with a Slider component and a GameTimer component. So, we need to
find the other component. So, private Slider
slider.
Ooh, tricky. And then on Start, we do
the standard thing, slider = Get
Component this time, because it's not on a different GameObject
of type <Slider>();
And then, let's print (slider); So, what we're doing
here is making sure that we're actually finding the Slider, before we go any
further.
Console, Slider UI
"(UnityEngine.UI.Slider)". Great! It looks like we've found the
Slider! That's fantastic! So another thing this game timer is going to need
is a couple more numbers. We're going to have to have a public
int level
Seconds, or somthing like that with a small l.
And for now, I'm going to have seconds left.
So, we have a couple of integers
there. Now, we're not, longer term, going to want to expose the
seconds left publicly, so because of that,
I'm going to put it on a separate line. I'm going to
space it down with all of my private variables,
and I'm going to put myself a to-do, to make it private once this is working.
So, you can go forward slash forward slash TODO.
So, it's a special word. "make
private later".
Or you could serialize the field, thats the other option, or
you could use serialize but let's not do that. Let's just
make it private later. We don't want people ever changing it in the Inspector.
OK fantastic! So now, if we look at
our Slider and go down to our script.
If we can build, let's see what's wrong.
Ah, it's just a missing semicolon.
Now,
once the UI updates, then we can have a
levelSeconds of something. Now, I don't want it defaulting to 0 in the
script, so let me default this to, I don't know, 100
seconds. That sounds about right, a minute and 40 seconds.
And now if I play,
the Inspector values are
overwriting, so it's a little bit annoying that you
can specify something in script, but when you first
create the object, the Inspector picks up the value and then
overwrites. So, I don't really like this, because
how about if I change the script now to 80 seconds.
What value am I going to get here, when I play? Well, I get 100
because the Inspector value, in the instance, overrides what's in
the code. So, just be aware of that. It's
still good practice to put a sensible value here in the script,
in the code, because if I was to remove this component
altogether, and then add a new Game Timer,
it will inherit whatever is in the code. But once that component
is added to the GameObject, any changes in the Inspector
will override what's in the script. So, I just wanted you to know
how that works. Alright, so then what
are we going to do on the Start? Well, on the Start, it's simply going to be seconds
Left =
levelSeconds; right. So, in the
beginning, when we run
we just have 100 seconds
left. OK then, every second we need to reduce
those number of seconds, and then, every frame we also
need to be reducing the Slider value,
so that it represents the seconds
left over the number of seconds. Well, let's do the Slider bit first. Let's
try slider dot and see what we've got.
slider.value = secondsLeft
/ divided by
levelseconds; Now, is that right?
It's not really is it, because it's going to have a value of 1,
when the secondsLeft is at the top
and it's going to have a value of 0 at the wrong time. So, we
actually want 1 minus all of that.
That's the simple math that's on there. So, let's take
a look and see if that works. Every Update we're going to be updating the
Slider. If we had 100 seconds left and
started reducing, what happens? We get a
snap in the value, so it's not right. OK.
So, what's wrong here?
Well, this is a useful lesson in
types. Let's print this thing that we're
trying to output, OK, to the Console and
see what it is.
You're going to find something quite interesting here, hopefully if I get my
brackets right. One more bracket.
Look at the Console, OK.
0, 0, 0, 0, but if I reduce the seconds left, look what happens
down at the bottom here. It snaps straight to 1!
How come are we getting (secondsLeft /
levelSeconds) as coming out as an integer?
It's because it's matching the type. Both levelSeconds and
secondsLeft are integers, therefore when we do this
division we get an integer out. So, we're actually going to want a float
here, so that this is a floating point calculation,
down here. OK. And the same
with secondsLeft. So, it's good to start trying to use integers
if you can, but if you're then going to do a floating point calculation
with them, you're going to need to use floats. Now, as I reduce
my time, you see, it works! If I set my time to
50, the Slider is in the middle. If I set my time to
1, it's right on the right. And of course, this would work fine if
it was only a 10 second level. Now, if we have 5 seconds
left, we're in the middle. You get the idea? So, we are showing
the proportion of the way through the level we are, with this simple
code, but we do need to use floats here.
Fantastic! So, that's the slider value! The final thing
we need to do is, just actually take 1 second per second
off the game time. So,
how do we do that? So, we have a method called
Time.timeSince
LeveLoad, like that. It's just a float and it's the number of
seconds since the level loaded. So,
given that we can actually simplify our entire
class. We actually don't need secondsLeft at all anymore,
therefore we don't need to
set it here, because our slider value can
just be the timeSinceLevelLoad divided
by the levelSeconds. So, it's fine to go
through the logic before, but now we have a float divided by a
float, which should work. Let's take a look over in Unity,
click play, and our Slider
is going along at a rate of...
Well, it's fast enough that it'll get to the end, after 100 seconds. I'm not
going to wait 100 seconds, so let's set
the Level Seconds to say 5 and see how it
behaves then. Off it goes! Look
fantastic, zipping along for 5 seconds! So, that
very simple line there makes sure that the slider value is always a value
between 0 and 1, which is the proportion
of the way from the beginning of the level
to the total level time. So,
now we need to actually play the audio. So,
we're going to need a private AudioSource.
So, how are we going to find that AudioSource? We're going to go audio
Source
dot = rather, GetComponent.
Why GetComponent? Because it's a component
on the same object right? We have the Game Timer here, which is a component,
and the AudioSource is a component on the same GameObject
of type <AudioSource>();
Fantastic! So, now we need our if condition! We need to start detecting whether the
level has finished. So, that's simply going to be
if the time since the level has loaded
is greater than or equal to, just in case we skip over
it, levelSeconds.
OK. If that happens,
then for now, we'll just say ("Level over").
But there's a problem
with the logic here. This is going to happen every Update, so if we
let this occur, watch what happens. We're going to get ("Level
over") called, again and again and again and again. Watch it when we go to
the end of the timer. LevelLoad just keeps
getting called, very frame. We only want it called once.
Before we start putting our logic in here, that plays sound
and loads levels, we only want this called once. So, I'm going to
introduce a private Bool called,
isEndOfLevel;
which detects the end of level state, quite obviously.
And it's going to start being false, because in the beginning
it's not the end of the level. And what I'm going to say
is if the timeSinceLevelLoad is greater than the level
Seconds, i.e. the level timer is up, and
so && isEndOfLevel.
Then, we print level is over and set
isEndOfLevel to true.
OK, let's try that! Now, what should happen,
when the timer expires, is we
just get a single log of
level end. OK.
We get none so that's because I'm missing
a not. If the level time
has expired and it's the end of the level. Now look, if
you're finding this difficult to read, it's perfectly reasonable to put it into a separate
Bool like this. You can say bool,
and then, we can say timeIs
Up =.
Now, I like to use brackets here, and then, I'll put
my conditional statement, my comparison, inside of the brackets.
bool timeIsUp
and then, that's the comparison. Then, the if statement reads
if (timeIsup &&
the level is not over. Not is
EndOfLevel. Then, print ("Level
over") and set the Boolean. Let's try it!
That's the logic, so that we only get a single call.
And at the end here, we just get a single
level over. Better! OK fantastic!
So now, we're ready to start in here. Instead of printing ("Level over")
we want to actually play the sound. So, audioSource.play
...
and it's a method.
That will just play the AudioSource. That's fine! That's
pretty clearly going to work, and then, it needs to wait a while
before it loads the level. How are we going to do that? Do you remember the
method for waiting a bit. Well, it's
Invoke, but you'll probably recall, if you look at the docs for Invoke,
that it wants a method name and then an amount of time.
Well, let's assume we have
a method called ("Load next level"
OK, which we don't yet.
And then, let's make the amount of time, audioSource
.clip.length);
And then, it'll automatically adjust to our clip.
Fantastic! Now, I need a separate method
for LoadLevel, just because of the way Invoke works. So, I'm going to create
a simple LoadNextLevel () method.
The most basic outline we can.
And then, we're going to need to use a LevelManager, which we don't have yet, but I'll
assume we do for a minute. Dot LoadNext
Level. But it's not autocompleting, so let's get this
LevelManager first, because otherwise the autocomplete is a mess.
So again, up here we just go ahead and find ourselves a LevelManager right.
I'm having some slight finger
issues. OK fantastic! And then, on Start we find it!
Now, which find do we use? Is it Get
Component? Well, no because
the script here is looking for a LevelManager on a different Game
Object. The script is on the Slider, the LevelManager
is a different GameObject. So, we need GameObject dot. Not
GameTimer. GameObject.FindObjectOfType
...
...and then,
we can put the type in
and then the method. Fine! Now,
we can say levelManager, with a small l...
.LoadNextLevel();
There we go!
Let's try all that! So, if the time is up
and it's not the end of the level, we play the source, we
ask to load the next level, after the source
clip has finished, and then, we
set this boolean, so that next time around this gets
skipped over, because there are going to be lots of updates in between. Alright,
if I printed Update here, it would just say Update Update Update, and only
once will it do this loading. That's the idea of that
logic there. Let's try this! My audio
clip might be heinously loud, but we can handle that!
Oh!
Uh my head! OK, that was
really really really loud! Don't worry about al of these errors. These errors are
because the next level has... Ah, it's just rubbish at the moment. We
haven't even tried to get our next level working. But that
worked, which is fantastic news! So, a couple of things to do!
I'm going to re-prefab my Level Canvas here, because it
now has the useful Slider Element in it, and
delete the old one. So, there it is. And I'm
also against my audio clip, I'm going to
reduce the volume of it, because it is crazy
noisy. So where do you find that?
You actually find it on the Slider itself,
against the AudioSource component. I'm going to set it to 50%,
and then, just check it all works again.
And then, we have handle the Win Condition. It just remains to move these pieces
of text at the bottom.
[Music Plays in Background] Awesome!
So, let's remove the bits of text at the bottom. We don't need a Win
Condition or a Lose Condition text anymore, but I'm going to keep
one of them and repurpose it
into this new piece of text, that says
"You Won!" or something like that. And it can pop up right over the middle of
the screen. It can be big,
It can have a much larger font,
and "Win Condition". It can just say
"You Won!" Get
ready for the next level.
Ah, let's not say that, because then we have to manage what the last
level is, but we want a "You Won!" thing like that.
It's not the "Win Condition" by name anymore, it's
now You Win.
It's just a label called You Win. And we're going to need
access to this You Win label,
so that we can turn it off. So, we want it by default to be
off like that, and then, we want it to come on
when the music plays.
So, how are we going to find it? That's what we need to think about briefly. How do you
find it? There are lots of ways you could find it, but in this case, let's
just do it by name. So, we're going to use the You Win
name. So, back in the script then, we need to find
this GameObject. GameObject
winLabel; OK, so we have an instance variable
there to store it in. On the Start let's find the Win
Label. So, I might put it in Start and then
refactor it. So, we're going to say winLabel
= GameObject.Find,
and it's by name this time.
I think it was ("You Win") wasn't it?
OK alright, fine!
So, we're going to try and find something of type
("You Win"). If we
get something back then that's fine, but if we
don't get something back, if not (winLabel), then
we want to just Debug.LogError
or probably LogWarning.
And it's up to you whether it's serious enough to be an error or a warning.
Is it a show stopper? It's kind of just a weird one, is it
going to come up? The game is still going to play but the "You Win!" won't show. So, I'm going to log
a warning. ("Please create You Win
object"); It's enough to just give
the designer a heads up. Fantastic! All of this
course can be refactored out, below to say
Find...
Find
YouWin (); OK, just to make
it read better. Fantastic! So, we go and find this You
Win object, and then, what we can also do at the
Start is if we do find it, we
just want to set it to
inactive. So, we want to set the win
Label to inactive. So, winLabel
.SetActive(false);
OK, so we find it
and then set it to inactive. That's one way of doing it.
You can change your method names and things here, but this is fine. We
find it, set it inactive. Then, down here
when we play the audioSource, then we say winLabel.Set
Active(true);
OK now, to stop anybody pushing any buttons, when this winLabel
is up, you may want to make it even bigger.
You could take the ("You Win") object and actually make it so large
that it goes over all of the buttons, in the game space.
Perhaps something like that. Alright, or maybe even
down to the bottom. And I'm going to change my text for
something that's a little bit more exciting, a little bit
more winnie. So, what's going to go well against green?
Maybe a yellow?
Something like that! That'll do! I better be
consistent. I think "You Won!" or green,
blue, purple? Who cares! Purple It's pretty
ugly, but is shows you, you won! Let's make sure it works!
Time is counting down, I can still click
around here,
and I get a "You Won!". Now, you might
want to set Time.timeScale to be
different in here, as an extra exercise, but you need
to be careful about doing that and then how that's going to intereact with
your Invoke. The purpose would be to stop all the enemies,
or for the short amount of time you could just do what I've done
and let them carry on. So, that's pretty cool!
The only problem I've quickly noticed, is to do
with the fact that these button prefabs have become disconnected for me.
If I try and place objects it's not working,
and that's because we've lost the prefab connections for
some of my objects. It's not a problem, I'll sort that out
a bit in the tidy up video. So congratulations
on getting this far and getting your win condition going,
and I will see you soon!